🔹 Variables (let, const)

What is a variable?
A variable is a named container used to store data values that can be referenced and manipulated throughout a program.
Example: let snacks = "Cookies"; (Here, snacks is the variable holding the value "Cookies").

Why do we need variables in programming?
They allow us to label data with descriptive names, so we can reuse, update, and track information without needing to remember the exact value every time.

Can a program work without storing data?
Technically, a very simple script could perform a one-off calculation, but any useful program (like a calculator or a social media app) needs to store and process data to function.

- let vs const -

What is the difference between let and const?
let allows you to reassign a value later, while const (short for constant) creates a binding that cannot be reassigned to a new value.

When should you use let?
Use let when you know the value of the variable will change over time.
Example: A counter in a loop or a "score" variable in a game.

When should you use const?
Use const by default for everything else. It makes your code more predictable and prevents accidental overwrites.
Example: A configuration setting like const API_KEY = "12345";.

What happens if you try to reassign a const variable?
JavaScript will throw a TypeError: Assignment to constant variable.

- Reassignment vs Mutation -

Can you change the value of a const variable?
No, you cannot reassign the variable itself to a new value (e.g., you can't change it from a string to a number).

Can you modify the contents of a const object or array?
Yes. This is called mutation. While the "container" (the reference) stays the same, the items inside it can change.
Example: const list = [1, 2]; list.push(3); works perfectly fine.

What is the difference between reassigning and mutating?
Reassigning is pointing the variable name to a brand-new "box" (value). Mutating is changing the "stuff" inside the current box.

- Scope -

What is block scope?
Block scope means the variable only exists within the nearest set of curly braces { }.

If a variable is declared inside { }, can it be accessed outside?
If declared with let or const, no. It is restricted to that block.

Do let and const behave the same in terms of scope?
Yes, both are block-scoped.

- Hoisting & TDZ -

Can you use a variable before declaring it?
Technically, JavaScript "hoists" declarations, but with let and const, you cannot access them before the line they are defined on.

What happens if you try with let or const?
You get a ReferenceError.

What happens when you access a variable before it is declared?
The program crashes because the variable is in the "Temporal Dead Zone."

What do you think the “temporal dead zone” means?
It is the period between the start of the block and the moment the variable is officially declared. During this "time," the variable exists but is strictly untouchable.

--------------------------------------------------

🔹 Data Types

What type of data is a string?
Textual data wrapped in quotes.
Example: "Hello World"

What type is a number?
Numeric data, including integers and decimals (floats). JavaScript doesn't distinguish between them.

What is a boolean?
A logical data type that can only be true or false.

What is the difference between null and undefined?
undefined means a variable has been declared but has not yet been assigned a value. null is an intentional assignment that represents "nothing" or "empty."

When does a variable become undefined?
When you declare it without giving it a value: 
let x; // x is undefined.

- Complex Types -

What is an object?
A collection of related data stored in "key-value" pairs.
Example: let user = { name: "Alice", age: 25 };

What is an array?
A special type of object used to store an ordered list of values.
Example: let colors = ["red", "green", "blue"];

How is an array different from an object?
Arrays are ordered and accessed by index (0, 1, 2). Objects are unordered and accessed by keys (names).

- Advanced Types -

What is a symbol and why is it unique?
A Symbol is a primitive value used to create unique identifiers for object properties. Even if two symbols have the same description, they are never equal.

What is BigInt and when would you need it?
BigInt is for storing very large integers that exceed the safe limit of the standard Number type. You’d use it for scientific calculations or financial data requiring high precision.

--------------------------------------------------

🔹 Type Coercion

What is type coercion?
It’s when JavaScript automatically converts a value from one data type to another (e.g., turning a string into a number).

Why does JavaScript convert types automatically?
To prevent the program from crashing when performing operations on mixed types.

- Implicit vs Explicit -

What is implicit type coercion?
When JavaScript does the conversion for you behind the scenes.
Example: 5 + "5" results in "55".

What is explicit type conversion?
When you manually convert a type using functions like String(), Number(), or Boolean().

- Equality -

What is the difference between == and ===?
== (Loose Equality) compares values after converting their types. 
=== (Strict Equality) compares both the value and the type without conversion.

Why can == sometimes give unexpected results?
Because of coercion. For example, 0 == false is true, which can lead to logic bugs.

- Truthy/Falsy -

What values are considered falsy in JavaScript?
false, 0, "" (empty string), null, undefined, and NaN.

Is "0" truthy or falsy?
Truthy, because it is a non-empty string.

Is an empty array truthy or falsy?
Truthy. All objects (including arrays) are truthy, even if they are empty.

Why do some values behave as true even when they look false?
JavaScript treats any value that isn't on the "falsy list" as truthy. A string with "0" or an empty array [] are still "things" that exist in memory.

--------------------------------------------------

🔹 Operators

- Arithmetic -

What do arithmetic operators do?
They perform mathematical calculations like addition (+), subtraction (-), multiplication (*), and division (/).

What is the result of division and modulus?
Division (/) gives the quotient (e.g., 10 / 2 = 5). 
Modulus (%) gives the remainder (e.g., 10 % 3 = 1).

- Comparison -

What do comparison operators return?
A Boolean (true or false).

How does JavaScript compare different data types?
It usually tries to convert them to numbers first. It's best to compare same-type data.

- Logical -

What does && (AND) mean?
Returns true only if both sides are true.

What does || (OR) mean?
Returns true if at least one side is true.

What does ! (NOT) do?
It flips the boolean value. !true becomes false.

- Ternary -

How can you write an if/else in one line?
Using the ternary operator: condition ? valueIfTrue : valueIfFalse.
Example: let access = age > 18 ? "Yes" : "No";

- Nullish Coalescing -

What does ?? do?
It returns the right-hand side only if the left-hand side is null or undefined.

How is ?? different from ||?
|| returns the right-hand side if the left is any falsy value (like 0 or ""). 
?? only triggers for null/undefined.

--------------------------------------------------

🔹 Control Flow

- Conditionals -

How does a program decide what code to run?
Through structures like conditionals and loops that evaluate expressions.

When should you use if/else?
When you have a few conditions to check or need complex logic.

When is switch more useful than if/else?
When you have a single variable that could be one of many specific "fixed" values.

- Loops -

Why do we need loops?
To run the same block of code multiple times without writing it out manually.

What problem do loops solve?
They prevent code repetition and allow us to handle large lists of data efficiently.

- Loop Types -

What is the difference between for, while, and do...while?
for: Used when you know the number of iterations.
while: Used when looping until a condition changes.
do...while: Always runs at least once before checking the condition.

When would you use for...in?
To loop over the properties (keys) of an object.

When would you use for...of?
To loop over the values in a collection, like an array or a string.

- Loop Control -

What does break do?
It immediately exits the loop.

What does continue do?
It skips the rest of the current loop iteration and jumps to the next one.

--------------------------------------------------

🔹 Functions

What is a function?
A reusable block of code designed to perform a particular task.

Why are functions important?
They allow for modularity, easier debugging, and reusability.

What problem do functions solve?
They eliminate the need to write the same logic repeatedly.

- Types -

What is a function declaration?
Defining a function with the function keyword and a name: function greet() { ... }.

What is a function expression?
Storing a function inside a variable: const greet = function() { ... };.

What is an arrow function?
A shorter syntax for writing functions: const greet = () => { ... };.

How are arrow functions different from regular functions?
They have a shorter syntax and they do not have their own "this" context.

- Parameters -

What happens if you don’t pass an argument?
The parameter inside the function becomes undefined.

What are default parameters?
Values that are used if no argument is provided: function greet(name = "Guest") { ... }.

What are rest parameters?
Used to gather an indefinite number of arguments into a single array using ...: function sum(...numbers) { ... }.

How do rest parameters handle multiple values?
They pack all extra arguments into an array.

--------------------------------------------------

🔹 Scope & Closures

- Scope -

What is global scope?
Variables declared outside any function or block, accessible from anywhere.

What is function scope?
Variables declared inside a function that cannot be accessed from outside.

What is block scope?
Variables restricted to curly braces { }.

- Lexical Scope -

How does JavaScript determine where a variable can be accessed?
Through Lexical Scoping (where the variable was physically written).

Can a function access variables outside itself?
Yes. An inner function always has access to the variables in its outer scope.

- Closures -

What is a closure?
When a function "remembers" its lexical environment even after that environment has finished executing.

Why can a function remember variables after it finishes running?
JavaScript keeps the outer scope alive in memory as long as the inner function needs it.

When would closures be useful in real applications?
For private variables or function factories.

--------------------------------------------------

🔹 this Keyword

What does this refer to in JavaScript?
The object that is currently executing the code.

Does this always refer to the same thing?
No. Its value changes depending on how the function is called.

- Context -

What is this in the global context?
In a browser, it refers to the window object.

What is this inside an object method?
It refers to the object the method belongs to.

- Binding -

What do call, apply, and bind do?
They allow you to explicitly set what "this" should be. call/apply run immediately; bind returns a new function.

Why would you want to control what this refers to?
To ensure a function uses the correct data context.

- Arrow Functions -

Why does this behave differently in arrow functions?
They don't have their own "this"; they capture it from the enclosing lexical context.

--------------------------------------------------

🔹 DOM Manipulation

What is the DOM?
The Document Object Model, representing HTML as a tree of objects.

How does JavaScript interact with HTML?
By using the DOM API to find, change, add, or delete elements.

- Selecting Elements -

What does querySelector do?
Finds the first element matching a CSS selector.

What does querySelectorAll return?
A NodeList containing all elements matching the selector.

- Creating Elements -

How do you create a new HTML element using JavaScript?
document.createElement('tagName').

How do you add it to the page?
Using methods like .appendChild() or .prepend() on a parent.

- Styling & Attributes -

How can you change classes dynamically?
Using the classList property.

What is classList used for?
To add, remove, toggle, or check for CSS classes.

What is dataset used for?
To access custom "data-" attributes.

--------------------------------------------------

🔹 Events

What is an event in JavaScript?
A signal that something has happened, like a click or a keypress.

How do web pages respond to user actions?
By using Event Listeners that run a function when specific events occur.

- Event Handling -

What does addEventListener do?
Attaches an event handler to an element.

What happens when a user clicks a button?
The browser detects the click and triggers any functions attached to that event.

- Event Flow -

What is event bubbling?
When an event runs on an element, then its parent, then all the way up to the document.

What is event capturing?
The event goes down from the document to the target element.

- Event Delegation -

Why would you attach one event listener to a parent instead of many children?
It is more efficient for memory and handles new children automatically.

- Controlling Events -

What does preventDefault do?
Stops the browser's default behavior for an event.

What does stopPropagation do?
Stops the event from bubbling up to parent elements.
